Appendix C: Generator Model Validation
======================================

Introduction
------------

Dynamic models form the basis for power system transient stability
simulations. Simulation accuracy is driven, in part, by the accuracy of
the individual models used to represent actual equipment installed in
the field. Models are developed during the baseline testing and model
creation process in close coordination between the Generator Owner and
manufacturer of the components. However, model errors do exist in the
dynamic cases used for planning and operating the bulk power system.
These errors are introduced through component replacements, ageing,
measurement error, etc., that are not captured in the updated models.
Some historical disturbances can partly be attributed to model
inaccuracy – post-mortem analysis using the model of expected
performance has shown gross differences from actual performance. The
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) Reliability
Standards MOD-026-1 and MOD-027-1 seek to ensure that dynamic models are
verified to ensure they accurately represent the equipment installed in
the field.

Using the on-line measurement data to validate unit’s parameters has
been proposed and discussed in recent years. Most of these online
approaches are installing intelligent electronics devices (IEDs), such as digital fault recorders (DFRs) or phasor measurement units (PMUs), to perform the dynamic model validation test. Different techniques for using online measurement data to validate or calibrate generator model parameters were already demonstrated in the literature .

In the parameter identification step, an automatic calibration method
using the extended Kalman filter (EKF) technique is used in this PMU
application example. The purpose of this recursive process is to save
significant effort and time from manual tuning. Publications indicate
that the performance of the EKF-based method is satisfactory and is
robust enough against measurement noise and parameter errors. The
question which can be answered with further research using the PARTF
test framework, is what is the effect of impairment of the PMU data
input to the model validation?

Fundamentals of Extended Kalman Filter (EKF)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Power system dynamics can be represented generally using differential
algebraic equations. From there, a state-space representation can be
defined and, if we utilize the mismatch to adjust the state variables,
an observer can be built. The EKF is one of the techniques for building
such an observer. The discrete model formulation with a time step of
:math:`\text{Δt}` is given by:

.. math::
   x_{k} &= f\left( x_{k - 1},z_{k - 1},u_{k - 1}\right) \\
   z_{k} &= h\left( x_{k},u_{k}\right) \\
 

where the :math:`x_{k}` vector contains the state variables at *k* time,
:math:`\ z_{k}` the measurements, and :math:`u_{k}` the input variables.
Commonly :math:`u_{k}` is a set of measured signals used as true values
for an event playback. Event playback applies measured signals to a
sub-system model and simulates the model’s response for a rigorous
comparison with measured response. Finally, :math:`f` and :math:`h` are
nonlinear functions that define the way in which the state variables
evolve and their relationship to the measurements, respectively.

The EKF is formulated as a two-step prediction-correction process. The
prediction step is a time update using the difference equations
represented by the :math:`f` function. The state variables of the next
time step are estimated based on the values of the previous time step.
In addition, the a-priori error covariance matrix, :math:`P_{k|k - 1}`,
is also predicted. The correction step calculates a Kalman Gain,
:math:`K_{k}`, which blends the estimated values and measured values to
obtain the corrected state variables and minimize the mismatch between
the estimated measurement and the actual measurement. The Kalman gain is
calculated so that the a-posteriori covariance, :math:`P_{k}`, is
minimized. The equations are given below:

*Prediction:*

.. math:: 
   x_{k|k - 1} &= f\left( x_{k - 1},z_{k - 1},u_{k - 1} \right) \\
   \mathbf{P}_{k|k - 1} &= \mathbf{A}_{k}\mathbf{P}_{k - 1}{\mathbf{A}_{k}}^{T} + \mathbf{Q}_{k - 1} \\

*Correction:*

.. math:: 
   \mathbf{K}_{k} &= \mathbf{P}_{k|k - 1}{\mathbf{H}_{k}}^{T}\left( \mathbf{H}_{k}\mathbf{P}_{k|k - 1}{\mathbf{H}_{k}}^{T} + \mathbf{R}_{k} \right)^{- 1} \\
   x_{k|k} &= x_{k|k - 1} + \mathbf{K}_{k}\left( z_{k} - h\left( x_{k|k - 1},u_{k} \right) \right) \\
   \mathbf{P}_{k|k} &= \left( I - \mathbf{K}_{k}\mathbf{H}_{k} \right)\mathbf{P}_{k|k - 1}

where :math:`\mathbf{Q}_{k}` is the model error covariance matrix,
:math:`\mathbf{R}_{k}` is the measurement noise covariance matrix, and
:math:`\mathbf{A}_{k}` and\ :math:`\ \mathbf{H}_{k}` are Jacobian
matrices defined as:

.. math:: 
   \mathbf{A}_{k} &= \frac{\partial f\left( x_{k - 1},z_{k - 1},u_{k - 1} \right)}{\partial x}\\
   \mathbf{H}_{k} &= \frac{\partial h\left( x_{k},u_{k} \right)}{\partial x} \\

Generator model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to model the generator unit, a classical generator model is
adopted (fig.1). The discrete dynamic equations which define its
behavior, and the parameters to calibrate are:


.. math:: 
   \delta_{k} &= \delta_{k - 1} + bas_{\text{rad}}\ \left( \omega_{k - 1} - \omega_{0} \right)\ \text{Δt} \\
   \omega_{k} &= \omega_{k - 1} + \frac{\omega_{0}\ }{2{\tilde{H}}_{k - 1}}\left( P_{m} - \frac{\text{E\ }V_{k}\sin\left( \delta_{k} - \theta_{k} \right)}{{{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}}_{\text{\ k} - 1}} - D\ \left( \omega_{k - 1} - \omega_{0} \right) \right)\ \text{Δt} \\
   {\tilde{H}}_{k} &= {\tilde{H}}_{k - 1}  \\   
   {{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}}_{k}  &= {{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}}_{\text{\ k} - 1}  \\                   
   D_{k} &= D_{k - 1} \\ 


Where :math:`\delta` represents the rotor angle, :math:`\omega` the
angular velocity of the rotor, :math:`\tilde{H}` the inertia constant,
:math:`\text{ba}s_{\text{rad}}` is a radian base normalization
factor,\ :math:`\ \omega_{0}` the nominal frequency, :math:`P_{m}` the
mechanical power, :math:`E` generator voltage magnitude, :math:`V`
voltage magnitude at point of connection, :math:`\theta` voltage angle
at point of connection, :math:`D` the damping coefficient and
:math:`{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}` the transient reactance. Note that (5)
defines the :math:`f` function and most of the variables are in p.u.

|image0|

Fig. 1: Classic generator model

On the other hand, the measurements, :math:`P/Q` , real/reactive power
at the point of connection can be calculated as:

.. math:: 
   P_{k} &= \frac{\text{E\ }V_{k}\ sin(\delta_{k} - \theta_{k})}{\ {{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}}_{k}}\\
   Q_{k} &= \frac{- V_{k}^{2} + E\ V_{k}\text{\ cos}(\delta_{k} - \theta_{k})}{\ {{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}}_{k}} \\  

Now, the :math:`h` function was defined by (2). Then, the state vector
can be defined as
:math:`x_{k} = \left\lbrack \delta_{k}\ ,\ \omega_{k},\ H_{k},\ {{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}}_{k}\ ,\ D_{k} \right\rbrack^{T}\ `
, the measurement vector as
:math:`z_{k} = \left\lbrack P_{k}\ ,\ Q_{k} \right\rbrack^{T}` and the
input as
:math:`u_{k} = \left\lbrack V_{k}\ ,\ \theta_{k} \right\rbrack^{T}`.

Getting Started
---------------
Before the Generator Model Validation example can be run some first-time setup is required.  This is the same setup as the Linear State Estimation example and these instructions can also be found in :ref:`Quick Start <MatlabToolbox>`

The GMV application example includes Dynamic Events.  These examples require the Matlab Power System Toolbox available from The Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden.  

	* Download `PSTV3`_, `PST Data`_, and the `Manual`_ 

		.. _`PSTV3`: http://www.eps.ee.kth.se/personal/vanfretti/pst/download_updates/pstv3.zip
		.. _`PST Data`: http://www.eps.ee.kth.se/personal/vanfretti/pst/download_updates/pstdat.zip
		.. _`Manual`: http://www.eps.ee.kth.se/personal/vanfretti/pst/download_updates/PSTMan.zip
	
	* You will need to `register and get a password`_
	
		.. _`register and get a password`: http://www.eps.ee.kth.se/personal/vanfretti/pst/Power_System_Toolbox_Webpage/Software_Request.html

	* As with the MatPower toolbox, unzip these into your `Documents\\MATLAB\\Toolbox` folder and set up the Matlab Path

Note that the Power System Toolbox is not open source software and cannot be redistributed.

Matlab Path
~~~~~~~~~~~
:ref:`Quick Start <MatlabToolbox>` provides instructions for setting up the matlab path to the matlab toolbox folder and all subfolders, if this was done before the PST toollbox was installed, then the path to the toolbox will also need to be added as follows:

When opening the PARTF project, a Matlab command window opens.  From within this window, use the ``pathtool`` to ``Add with Subfolders`` `Documents\\MATLAB\\ToolBox\\pstv3`

Example Generator Model Validation
----------------------------------

Dynamic events
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

After the PST is incorporated, the user will be able to run the toolbox
typing “\ *s\_simu”* MATLAB function from the command window. When the
user is asked to select a file, choose *“<your PARTF
location>\\Modules\\Matlab\\Events\\CSVPlugin\\cases\\d2aem.m”* to
simulate a dynamic 3 phase fault in the bus number 3. In this file,
generation units are set as the classical generator model present in
Fig. 1. The default values of 100 MVA and Base Frequency of 60Hz is
suitable or can be changed. When s\_simu completes, press enter to end
the program. The fault is released after 0.2 s and after that, an
oscillatory event takes place. Now all the signals needed have been
created in the MATLAB workspace.

Create a .csv input file for PARTF: in Matlab, type s\_simuToFile
(Please, check in the file the values of these variables: app\_sel=2;
NoiseVariance=0; PMULocations=[1]). This matlab program creates three
different files in your \ *My Documents\\PARTF\\Tests\\GMV* folder:

a. The first file is a \ *.tst* file which will be opened in the PARTF
       framework.

b. The second one \ *.csv* file in the \ *..\\Inputdata* folder
       containing the signals of each one of the PMUs.

c. The last file is a reference signal waveform also in
       the \ *..\\Inputdata* folder. This file will be used during the
       analysis of the test results.

Now you can browse and select the newly
created \ *DynamicSystem\_case13\_1pmus.tst* in the
PARTF Test File control. Use the Open button to create the specific bus.
Note that the Event Parameters control now lists the relative path to
the newly created \ *.csv* file. To run this test do the following:

1. Since a new test has been opened, the VisualiseAppModelValidation
       application will need to be reset by clicking on
       the Restart Plots button.

2. In the PARTF framework, click Single Run in the bottom center of the
       panel.

The Figure 2 shows the results for this kind of event. Almost all the
state variables are displayed. We can observe the convergence of the
internal parameters of the generator model to the real values
(:math:`\tilde{H} = 6.5`, :math:`{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}`\ =0.25,
:math:`D = 3`). The initial condition for these parameters are
(:math:`{\tilde{H}}_{0} = 4.55`, :math:`{x^{'}}_{d0\ }`\ =0.275,
:math:`D_{0} = 4.2`) . It is important to notice that the time zero in
the visualize app corresponds to the 2s in the original reference time.
The reference can be changed with the offset start time in the app
configuration. The main reason of this change is to avoid the
measurements values in the moment were the fault is still present in the
system. The :math:`\hat{\delta}` is also plotted in order to check the
correct operation of the method, any anomaly is easier to visualize on
this variable.

|image1|

Fig. 2: Front panel of the visualization VI for the Generator Model
Validation app.

It is important to mention that the results can change significantly
with the interpolation factor chosen. The interpolation factor is
another app config parameter. Take in account that the measurements
arrive with an interarrival time defined by the reporting rate. However,
the reporting time is not small enough to ensure that the linearization
approach in the Kalman filter is valid. So a cubic interpolation of the
phasor is used and the :math:`\text{Δt}` is decreased by a factor equal
to :math:`2^{\text{in}t_{\text{fac}}}\ `.

MonteCarlo analysis 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Several kinds of test can be performed with the python scripts. As an
example, one of them is presented in this documentation. 

The initial gain matrix :math:`\mathbf{P}_{0}` is the co-variance matrix
of the estimated state vector error. :math:`\mathbf{P}_{k|k}` will be
updated in EKF and converge to zero if EKF works. Hence the parameters
in :math:`\mathbf{P}_{0}` are not so much important. They only will have
influence on the converge rate. Therefore, fine tuning is needed.
Co-variance matrix :math:`\mathbf{Q}_{k}` represents the processing
noise and unmolded dynamics. :math:`\mathbf{Q}_{k}` is less
deterministic and will be considered constant at any instant of time

:math:`\mathbf{Q}_{k} = \mathbf{Q}`. For these two matrices values
similar to were used.

So the most important co-variance to define is the one which contains
the covariance of the measurements :math:`\mathbf{R}_{k}`.

Like the process covariance matrix, this matrix is ​​considered constant
as a function of time :math:`\mathbf{R}_{k} = \mathbf{R}`. So a variable
called Noise Variance is defined as one of the app config parameters.
With this variable the user can control the value of the diagonal
elements of :math:`\mathbf{R}`.

With the PARTF running the same .tst file of the previous example, use
Monte Carlo Script control to the browse and select My
Documents\\PARTF\\Scripts\\\ *GMV*\\\ *GMV*\ MonteCarlo.py script. Then
press the blue ``Monte Carlo`` button. This script will repeat the test
sequence ten times: generate the signal, generate synchrophasors and
impair them as the PMU with a Blackman window would, then it runs the Model Validation
app. This process is repeated for each value of the Noise Variance set.
Noise Variance Set = {1e-1, 0.5e-1, 1e-2, 0.5e-2, 1e-3, 0.5e-3}

All internal signals are saved in a \ *.mat* in the *Documents\PARTF\Output folder.
To evaluate the application performance, a MATLAB file has been provided in 
*\\PARTF\\Scripts\\GMV\\PlotGMV_MonteCarlo.m*.
Run this file in MATLAB and when the ``Select Data File`` dialog opens, browse to ..\\PARTF\\Output and
open the recently created *ModelGenValidation\_#.mat* file. As can be seen from the
Figures 3 to 5 (here the sequence was repeated 1000 times), the
magnitude error between the estimated parameters and the real ones are
plotted for each one of the Noise Variance values.

|image2|

Fig. 3 Inertia constant error vs different **R** matrices. Threshold is
equal to 2% of the reference value.

|image3|

Fig. 4: Error of :math:`{x^{'}}_{\text{d\ }}` vs different **R**
matrices. Threshold is equal to 1% of the reference value.

|image4|

Fig. 5: Damping error vs different **R** matrices. Threshold is equal to
2% of the reference value.

Observing the figures, the user can conclude that a value between
:math:`0.5\ 10^{- 2}` and :math:`10^{- 3}` is the optimal solution.
Besides, we can assume that the error in :math:`{x^{'}}_{\text{d }}` is
smaller than in the other cases because the initial condition is more
similar to the real one.

Finally, is important to mention that the variance of the measurements
is not an a-priori well known value. It is assumed that the measurements of
the PMU include a specific noise distribution in the voltage magnitude
and phase (:math:`V,\theta`) and in the current magnitude and phase. For
all the result display, a fixed value (almost excessive) equal to
:math:`{\sigma = 10}^{- 3}` for the standard deviation of the AGWN of
all of these values was chosen.

For further analysis of the effects of PMU filtering, as an exercize for the user, the PMU filter settings can be set by the Monte Carlo Script to simulate various PMU configurations of Class and Reporting Rate to determine effects of the noise variance on the GMV appluication.

This application example and the accompaning documentation was provided by Pablo Gabriel Marchi <pmarchi@csc.conicet.gov.ar>

.. |image0| image:: figures/GMV/image1.png
   :width: 2.92453in
   :height: 1.61404in
.. |image1| image:: figures/GMV/image2.png
   :width: 6.50000in
   :height: 4.83681in
.. |image2| image:: figures/GMV/image3.png
   :width: 6.50000in
   :height: 3.25417in
.. |image3| image:: figures/GMV/image4.png
   :width: 6.50000in
   :height: 3.25407in
.. |image4| image:: figures/GMV/image5.png
   :width: 6.50000in
   :height: 3.25000in
